>> Bring your attention
to the natural breath,
the pulsation of expansion
and contraction throughout
the body.
You may allow the eyes to
open slightly, gazing softly,
pointed at the nose, or
the eyes may remain closed.
Observe the sound of
the breath, sensations
of air moving at the nostrils.
Allow the aperture
of the mind to open,
to include the entire body,
feeling the rise and fall
of the rib cage, the belly.
Notice when the
body is breathing in
and when the body
is breathing out.
On the in breath, be aware of
sensations throughout the body.
On the out breath, be aware of
Notice every part of the breath.
Don't miss any phenomena
as the breath reaches
into every cell of your body.
Maybe there are
tingling sensations.
Maybe there is heat or coolness.
Maybe there is pressure,
tightness or contraction.
Maybe there's resistance
somewhere in the body.
Maybe there are
areas where there's
no sensation in the body.
Or maybe there's
release, relaxation.
Just notice.
Just observe.
Notice if there's
any emotion present.
An emotion is a combination
of thought and sensation.
Deeper layers of
thoughts and feelings
might start to
come to the surface
or intensify as you
go into the body.
Old memories, feelings, anything
that is in the unconscious
may come up.
Don't get caught in any story.
Drop the story.
Become disinterested in any
thoughts that are arising
and try to open completely
to your experience
without resistance.
Be fully aware of the
changing phenomena,
but disinterested in
the meaning or content.
Let go of the need to
know why certain feelings
or sensations are there.
This is how you become
free of your conditioning.
You stop responding to the
thoughts generated by the mind.
Stop reacting with the mind
while allowing the sensations
to arise and pass away.
Over time, the
whirlpool of the mind
will start to calm down as
energy or prana is freed
from the patterns, so long as
you are no longer interested
in the particular
content of the phenomena.
Observe with a beginner's
mind, a not-knowing mind,
a mirror mind.
A mirror doesn't
care what is arising.
It simply reflects
reality as it is.
The mirror doesn't
move in response
to what is being reflected.
It is a revelation when
you realize there's
nothing to do in meditation.
You can relax or surrender
into what is already happening.
No matter what comes up, you
don't have to do anything.
Whatever hindrances
arise in the meditation,
we treat them the same way.
Pleasant or unpleasant
itching, tiredness, dullness,
restlessness, fantasies,
physical pain, emotions,
memories, bliss, inner
dialogues or narratives,
images in the mind.
We allow them to be as they are.
We don't push them away.
And we stay with the field of
changing sensation in the body.
Keeping awareness at the
root level of sensation.
In this way, we have a complete
experience of everything that
is arising, but we don't judge.
We let go of preferences.
We don't push anything away
and we don't grasp at anything.
Just observe.
Letting the stream of changing
phenomena come and go.
The more you just observe, the
more of the changing phenomena
is allowed to change freely.
The energy is allowed to
circulate in the body,
moving with its
own intelligence.
Allow the inner
energy, the inner
aliveness to move
inside the body.
Allow it to circulate freely.
It is healing energy,
evolutionary energy.
The energy knows what to do.
Don't try to control anything or
micromanage what is happening.
Your only job is to get
yourself out of the way.
Remain aware.
Remain as the unchanging
space in which
everything arises and passes.
Rest as the unchanging
awareness within which
everything arises and passes.
Rest as the space, this
primordial consciousness that
has no preference, no agenda.
Awareness is not
becoming anything.
It is perfect as it is.
Nothing can be added
and nothing can
be taken away from awareness.
Rest as awareness, letting the
inner energy circulate freely.
The more you rest
within awareness,
the deeper unconscious layers
of resistance within the self
structure will arise.
And you may find that
greater equanimity
will be needed to remain
conscious and present.
The deeper your
surrender to what
is, the deeper the purification.
[BELL SOUND]